docs: a stub for client libraries section (#4881)
edgedb/edgedb: docs/reference/bindings/datetime.rst

.. _ref_bindings_datetime:

==================
Date/Time Handling
==================

EdgeDB has 6 types related to date and time handling:

* :eql:type:`datetime` (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_datetime>`)
* :eql:type:`duration` (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_duration>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_local_datetime>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::local_date`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_local_date>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_relative_duration>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::date_duration`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_date_duration>`)

We generally map datetime values to a compatible native type in the binding's
language when that native type meets all these criteria:

* The type is in the language's standard library
* The type has sufficient range (EdgeDB timestamps range from year 1 to 9999)
* The type has sufficient precision (at least microseconds)

> If any of the above is not true we tend to provide a custom type in the client
> library itself that is convertible to whatever type language or any popular
> external dependencies have. Exceptions: JavaScript has millisecond precision on
> their ``Date`` type (which is actually a timestamp) and we decided that it's
> better to use that type by default even though it doesn't have enough
> precision.

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification, @tailhook. See if this works:

```suggestion
If any of the above criteria are *not* met, we usually provide a custom type
in the client library that can be converted to a language-native type or a 
type provided by a third-party library. Exception: The JavaScript ``Date``
type (which is actually a timestamp) has only millisecond precision, but we
determined it's better to use that type by default even though it doesn't have
sufficient precision.
```

Is there anything we can say here about why we made this call on the JavaScript ``Date`` conversion? I might not go into anything super complicated here, but if we could briefly explain why we made this call, I think it could be useful.

Author: Well, more thinking about that, I'm not sure that JavaScript is special. Maybe it's reverse: Rust is special (i.e. Rust has edgedb-specific types, primarily because REPL should represent types exactly). For the datetime type Rust and JavaScript are the only exceptions as far as I remember. I'm not sure about duration/relativedelta.

Reviewer: @tailhook Sounds like it might be worth calling out both JavaScript _and_ Rust.

Author: I don't think adding more text will help. I think we can say something like "If these criteria don't met, please ping us in chat, or use your best judgement."

.. _ref_bindings_datetime:

==================

> Date/Time Handling

Reviewer: Having second thoughts on this, actually. I think maybe it makes sense to keep your title case and for me to circle back on those that *don't* use title case to bring them in line. Having given it some more consideration and seeing that it does seem to be the prevailing style in other parts of the docs, I think it makes sense.

* :eql:type:`datetime` (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_datetime>`)
* :eql:type:`duration` (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_duration>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_local_datetime>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::local_date`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_local_date>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::relative_duration`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_relative_duration>`)
* :eql:type:`cal::date_duration`
  (:ref:`binary format <ref_protocol_fmt_date_duration>`)

Usually we try to map those types to the respective language-native types,
with the following caveats:

* The type in standard library
* It has enough range (EdgeDB has timestamps from year 1 to 9999)
* And it has good enough precision (at least microseconds)

If any of the above is not true we tend to provide a custom type in the client
library itself that is convertible to whatever type language or any popular
external dependencies have. Exceptions: JavaScript has millisecond precision on
their ``Date`` type (which is actually a timestamp) and we decided that it's
better to use that type by default even though it doesn't have enough

> precision.

Author: For example, in Rust we have `edgedb...::Duration` type that can be converted into `std::time::Duration` (stdlib) and `chrono::Duration` (external library) and back via `value.try_into()`. Different languages have different ways to convert types. But I don't know what "compatible" type means.

Precision
=========

:eql:type:`datetime`, :eql:type:`duration`, :eql:type:`cal::local_datetime` and
:eql:type:`cal::relative_duration` all have precision of **1 millisecond**.

This means that if language-native type have a bigger precision such as
nanosecond, client library has to round that timestamp when encoding it for
EdgeDB.

We use **rouding to the nearest even** for that operation. Here are some
examples of timetamps with high precision, and how they are stored in the
database::

    2022-02-24T05:43:03.123456789Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.123457Z

    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002345Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002Z
    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002500Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002Z
    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002501Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000003Z
    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002499Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002Z

    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000001234Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000001Z
    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000001500Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002Z
    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000001501Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000002Z
    2022-02-24T05:43:03.000001499Z → 2022-02-24T05:43:03.000001Z

> Note as described in :ref:`datetime protocol documentation
> <ref_protocol_fmt_datetime>` the value is encoded as a *signed* microseconds
> delta since a fixed time. Some care must be taken when rounding negative
> microsecond values. See `tests for Rust implementation`_ for a good set of
> test cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

    As described in our :ref:`datetime protocol documentation
    <ref_protocol_fmt_datetime>`, the value is encoded as a *signed*
    microseconds delta since a fixed time. Some care must be taken when
    rounding negative microsecond values. See `tests for Rust implementation`_
    for a good set of test cases.
```

> Rounding to the nearest even applies to all operations that client libraries
> perform, in particular:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
EdgeDB client libraries round to the nearest even for all operations they
perform that require rounding, in particular:
```

> 1. Encoding timestamps *and* time deltas (see the :ref:`list of types
>    <ref_bindings_datetime>`) to the binary format if precision of the native
>    type is higher than microseconds.
> 2. Decoding timestamps *and* time deltas from the binary format is precision
>    of native type is lower than microseconds (applies for JavaScript for
>    example)
> 3. Converting from EdgeDB specific type (if there is one) to native type and
>    back (depending on the difference in precision)
> 4. Parsing a string to an EdgeDB specific type (this operation is optional to
>    implement, but if it is implemented, it must obey the rules)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Encoding timestamps *and* time deltas (see the :ref:`list of datetime types
  <ref_bindings_datetime>`) to the binary format if precision of the native
  type is greater than microseconds.
* Decoding timestamps *and* time deltas from the binary format if precision
  of the native type is less than microseconds (applies to JavaScript for
  example)
* Converting from EdgeDB-specific type (if there is one) to a native type and
  back when those types differ in their precision
* Parsing a string to an EdgeDB-specific type (Implementation is not required,
  but if it *is* implemented, it must use this rounding strategy.)
```
